# Sickle cell anaemia

**Sickle cell anaemia** AR. Incidence: &lt;1% of people of African
descent. Abnormal **haemoglobin (Hb)** (Glu to Val substitution at
position 6 in Hb Î² chain). HbS polymerises in hypoxia, causing
substantially decreased red cell deformability. Importantly, erythrocyte
membrane function and interaction with endothelium are altered.
Treatment: folate supplementation, hydroxyurea, transfusion.

HbSS (sickle disease) polymerises at 6.7kPa

HbAS (sickle trait) polymerises at 2-3kPa

Acute crises:

\- Acute pain (vaso-occlusive crisis) - may progress to multi-organ
failure with a **SIRS** response.

\- Acute sickle chest syndrome - may be precipitated by infarction, fat
embolism, infection, or *surgery* . Causes chest pain, pulmonary
infiltrate, and fever.

\- Acute severe anaemia:

o Splenic sequestration crisis. Vaso-occlusion within spleen leads to
removal of RBCs from circulation and rapidly enlarging splenomegaly. Rx:
transfusion, prevent further episodes with splenectomy. Mortality 15%.

o Aplastic crisis - transient cessation of erythropoesis. Follows
infection, often with parvovirus B19.

Other problems:

\- Pulmonary - 2/3 have asthma, 1/3 have sleep apnoea. Interstitial
fibrosis complicates recurrent acute chest events.

\- Liver disease - several causes may co-exist: hepatic infarction,
pigment gallstones, iron overload (from multiple transfusions).

\- Renal disease - sickling in renal capillaries (vasa recta).
Haematuria, proteinuria, hypertension are common. 1/3 of patients have
renal impairment.

\- Sepsis - increased susceptibility to infection (particularly
S.Pneumoniae) xxx ?? encapsulated organisms?

\- Pregnancy - low birth weight, pre-eclampsia, acute chest syndrome,
cerebral venous thrombosis, abruption, infection.

\- Stroke

\- Avascular necrosis of bone - may cause fat embolism.

\- Priapism

Anaesthesia: *avoid hypoxia, acidosis, hypovolaemia and hypothermia.*
High risk of acute chest syndrome and vaso-occlusive crises, but also
non-sickling complications of surgery (infection, organ failure).
Consider exchange transfusion pre-operatively for high risk cases.
Tourniquet use is controversial. xxx
